THE BOMBINGS IN BOSTON CONTINUE,
AS THE SITE OF THE EXPLOSIONS
HAS BECOME THE MOST COMPLICATED
CRIME SCENE IN THE CITY'S
HISTORY.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ON THE NEWSHOUR TONIGHT, WE GET
THE LATEST ON THE INVESTIGATION
INTO WHO WAS BEHIND THE ATTACK,
WHICH PRESIDENT OBAMA NOW CALLS
A "TERRORIST ACT."
>> Brown: THREE PEOPLE WERE
KILLED AND MORE THAN 150 WERE
INJURED, MANY CRITICALLY.
HARI SREENIVASAN TALKS WITH A
TRAUMA DOCTOR WHO LED A TEAM
THAT TREATED THE WOUNDED.
>> ONE OF OUR TRAUMA SURGEONS
RAN THE MARATHON AND WHEN HE
FINISHED REALIZED WHAT WAS
HAPPENING AND CAME IN TO OPERATE
ON SOME OF THE PATIENTS.
>> Ifill: AND THE DAILY DOWNLOAD
TEAM LOOKS AT SOCIAL MEDIA'S
ROLE IN SPREADING TRAGIC AS WELL
AS HEALING MESSAGES.
>> Brown: THEN, THE SUPREME
COURT TAKES UP A CHILD CUSTODY
CASE THAT TESTS THE SCOPE OF A
FEDERAL LAW INTENDED TO PROTECT
NATIVE AMERICAN FAMILIES.
MARCIA COYLE RECAPS TODAY'S
ARGUMENTS.
>> Ifill: AND A NEW BIPARTISAN
REPORT FINDS THAT AFTER 9/11,
THE U.S. "ENGAGED IN THE
PRACTICE OF TORTURE" WITH
DETAINEES.
WE TALK WITH TWO OF THE AUTHORS.
>> Brown: THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON
TONIGHT'S NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: THE INVESTIGATION OF
THE BOSTON MARATHON BOMBINGS
RAMPED UP TODAY, AS POLICE AND
FEDERAL AGENTS PORED OVER THE
CRIME SCENE.
THREE PEOPLE ARE DEAD, INCLUDING
AN EIGHT-YEAR-OLD BOY, AND MORE
THAN 170 OTHERS WERE INJURED.
A HANDFUL OF THOSE REMAIN IN
CRITICAL CONDITION AT VARIOUS
BOSTON HOSPITALS.
NEWSHOUR CORRESPONDENT KWAME
HOLMAN BEGINS OUR COVERAGE OF
THE DAY AFTER.
orter: THE MORNING SUN
FILTERED ACROSS AN EMPTY
BOYLSTON STREET TODAY, LITTERED
WITH THE REMNANTS OF YESTERDAY'S
MARATHON AND THE DOUBLE BOMBINGS
THAT BROUGHT IT ALL TO AN END.
>> IT KIND OF LOOKS LIKE A WAR
ZONE.
IT'S ALL CORDONED OFF OVER HERE
WHERE THEY HAVE A CRIME SCENE
AND SO IT'S PRETTY SHOCKING TO
KNOW THAT THERE'S SOME KIND OF A
TERRORIST ACT OCCURRED HERE AND
THERE ARE BOMBS RIGHT BY THE
FINISH LINE THAT I HAD JUST RUN
ACROSS.
>> Reporter: WITH A NEW DAY
CAME NEW REVELATIONS AND NEW
PERSPECTIVE ON THE BOMBINGS.
THIS RUNNER WEARING A HEAD
CAMERA CAPTURED THE MOMENT THE
FIRST BOMB EXPLODED AS SHE NEAR
IT HAD FINISH LINE.
(SCREAMS)
>> GET OUT OF THE STANDS!
>> Reporter: MORE AMATEUR
VIDEO FROM A SPECTATOR SHOWED
THE SECOND BLAST AND THE ENSUING
CHAOS IN THE BLEACHERS LINING
THE STREET.
AT A BRIEFING THIS MORNING,
FEDERAL, STATE, AND LOCAL
AUTHORITIES SAID ALL SUCH VIDEOS
AND PHOTOGRAPHS ARE VITAL TO
THEIRNVES ITIGATION AND THEY
ASKED BYSTANDERS TO SUBMIT
WHATEVER THEY HAVE.
>> HUNDREDS, IF NOT THOUSANDS,
OF PHOTOGRAPHS OR VIDEOS OR
OBSERVATIONS THAT WERE MADE DOWN
AT THAT FINISH LINE YESTERDAY
AND THEY'RE SITTING OUT THERE
AMONGST EVERYONE THAT'S WATCHING
THIS EVENT THIS MORNING.
AND I WOULD ENCOURAGE YOU TO
BRING FORWARD ANYTHING.
YOU MIGHT NOT THINK IT'S
SIGNIFICANT BUT IT MIGHT HAVE
SOME VALUE TO THIS
INVESTIGATION.
>> Reporter: OVERNIGHT, THE
F.B.I. DID SEARCH AN APARTMENT
IN A BOSTON SUBURB AND
CONSPIRACY THEORIES GREW ONLINE,
SOME OF THEM INVOLVING A SHAOD
DOEY FIGURE SEEN YESTERDAY ON A
ROOF TOP.
BUT FOR NOW OFFICIALS SAID THEY
HAVE NO SUSPECTS AND NO MOTIVE.
INSTEAD THE F.B.I.'S SPECIAL
AGENT IN CHARGE SAID THE CASE IS
WIDE OPEN.
>> THIS WILL BE A WORLDWIDE
INVESTIGATION.
WE WILL GO WHERE THE EVIDENCE
AND THE LEADS TAKE US.
WE WILL GO TO THE ENDS OF THE
EARTH TO IDENTIFY THE SUBJECT OR
SUBJECTS WHO ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR
THIS DESPICABLE CRIME AND WE DO
EVERYTHING WE CAN TO BRING THEM
TO JUSTICE.
>> Reporter: FEDERAL AGENTS
ALSO SET THE RECORD STRAIGHT ON
SOME WIDELY CIRCULATED
MISINFORMATION ABOUT THE
BOMBINGS.
>> TO DISPEL ANY RUMORS, THERE
WERE RUMORS FLOATING AROUND THAT
THERE WERE UP TO SEVEN DEVICES
AT ONE POINT.
THAT'S NOT TRUE.
I THINK THAT HAPPENED AS A
RESULT OF SOME SUSPECT PACKAGES
THAT WERE DISRUPTED.
BUT WE ONLY HAVE TWO DEVICES
THAT WE'RE AWARE OF AND BOTH OF
THOSE DEVICES WERE THE ONES THAT
WERE -- THAT DID THE DAMAGE AND
WERE INVOLVED IN THE EXPLOSIVES
INCIDENT.
>> Reporter: EVIDENCE
RECOVERED AT THE SCENE INDICATED
THE BOMBS POSSIBLY WERE COMPOSED
OF PRESSURE COOKERS STUFFED WITH
SHRAPNEL AND LEFT ON THE GROUND
IN BLACK DUFFEL BAGS.
DOCTORS FROM LOCAL HOSPITALS
SAID THE DEVICES WERE BUILT TO
DO SEVERE BODILY HARM.
>> WE HAVE REMOVED OBJECTS FROM
AT LEAST THREE PATIENTS THAT
CLEARLY WERE DESIGNED TO BE
PROJECTILES AND BUILT INTO THE
EXPLOSIVE DEVICE.
THESE OBJECTS ARE BALL BEARING
TYPE OR SMALL SHOT TYPE, JUST A
LITTLE LARGER THAN B. B. ROUND
METALLIC BEAD.
THEY ARE ABOUT TWO TO THREE
MILLIMETERS IN DIAMETER AND WE
HAVE ALSO REMOVED OVER A DOZEN
SMALL CARPENTER TYPE NAILS.
>> Reporter: DR. GEORGE MEL
MAY HOSE IS HEAD OF TRAUMA
SURGERY AT MASSACHUSETTS GENERAL
HOSPITAL.
>> THEY HAVE UNDERGONE MAJOR
OPERATIONS, PREDOMINANTLY,
UNFORTUNATELY, AMPUTATIONS
BECAUSE OF THE DEVASTATING
AFFECT OF THE BOMBS.
MANY OF THEM HAVE BEEN V SEVERE
WOUNDS, MOSTLY IN THE LOWER PART
OF THEIR BODY, WOUNDS RELATED TO
THE BLAST EFFECT OF THE BOMB AS
WELL AS SMALL METALLIC FRAGMENTS
THAT ENTERED THEIR BODY,
PELLETS, SHRAPNEL, NAILS THAT
THESE BOMBS HAD.
>> Reporter: NICHOLAS YANNI
AND HIS WIFE LEANNE WERE
STANDING ABOUT TEN FEET FROM
WHERE ONE OF THE BOMBS WENT OFF.
HE SPOKE TODAY FROM TUFTS
MEDICAL CENTER.
>> I THINK I HAD A PIERCED DRUM
BUT NOTHING MAJOR, MY EARDRUMS
ARE INTACT SO NO MAJOR ISSUES ON
MY END.
MY WIFE HAD SHRAPNEL THAT WENT
THROUGH HER LOWER LEFT LEG AND I
THINK IT SHATTERED HER FIBULA
AND THEY HAD TO DO SOME WORK
WITH HER AND SHE'S GOT TO GO IN
FOR SURGERY AGAIN TOMORROW.
>> Reporter: IQUIRNIES ABOUT
THE VICTIMS LIT UP SOCIAL MEDIA
IN THE IMMEDIATE AFTERMATH OF
THE BLASTS AS DID EYEWITNESS
POSTS ABOUT THE BOMBINGS AND
OTHER INFORMATION.
AND IN WASHINGTON TODAY, THE
FLAG OVER THE WHITE HOUSE WAS
LOWERED TO HALF-STAFF IN HONOR
OF THE VICTIMS.
AND THE PRESIDENT MADE A NEW
STATEMENT, THIS TIME EQUATING
THE ATTACK WITH TERRORISM.
>> THIS WAS A HEINOUS AND
COWARDLY ACT AND GIVEN WHAT WE
NOW KNOW ABOUT WHAT TOOK PLACE,
THE F.B.I. IS INVESTIGATING IT
AS AN ACT OF TERRORISM.
ANY TIME BOMBS ARE USED TO
TARGET INNOCENT CIVILIANS IT IS
AN ACT OF TERROR.
>> Reporter: BUT MR. OBAMA
SAID THE RESPONSE PROVES THE
ATTACKERS WILL NOT GET THEIR
WAY.
>> FUN TO KNOW WHO WE ARE, WHAT
AMERICA IS, HOW WE RESPOND TO
EVIL, SELFLESSLY,
COMPASSIONATELY, UNAFRAID.
IN THE COMING DAYS WE WILL
PURSUE EVERY EFFORT TO GET TO
THE BOTTOM OF WHAT HAPPENED AND
WE WILL CONTINUE TO REMAIN
VIGILANT.
>> Reporter: HERE AT THE
CAPITOL, MEMBERS OF CONGRESS PUT
ASIDE PARTISAN DIFFERENCES TO
MOURN THE VICTIMS AND PRAISE THE
FIRST RESPONDERS AND THEY VOWED
THE NATION WILL HAVE JUSTICE AND
WILL NOT GIVE IN TO TERROR.
>> FEDERAL BUREAU INVESTIGATION,
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
ARE INVESTIGATING THIS AS
AGGRESSIVELY AS POSSIBLE.
AS THE PRESIDENT SAID LAST
NIGHT, REST ASSURED THAT THE
PERPETRATORS WILL FEEL THE FULL
WEIGHT OF JUSTICE FOR THIS
TERRIBLE CRIME.
>> FOR MOST OF US, IT'S HARD TO
IMAGINE NOW ANYONE COULD EVEN
CONTEMPLATE DOING SOMETHING LIKE
THIS.
BUT, AS ALWAYS, AS A NATION, WE
FACE THIS SAD REALITY HEAD ON
AND SHOW THE WORLD THAT AMERICA
DOES NOT COWER IN THE FACE OF
IT.
>> Reporter: THE SECRETARY OF
HOMELAND SECURITY, JANET
NAPOLITANO, SAID THERE'S NO
EVIDENCE OF A WIDER PLOT, BUT
EXTRA SECURITY MEASURES WILL
STAY IN EFFECT FOR NOW.
THAT WAS APPARENT ACROSS THE
COUNTRY WITH A HEIGHTENED STATE
OF VIGILANCE.
K-9 TEAMS WERE OUT IN FORCE AT
LOS ANGELES INTERNATIONAL
AIRPORT, A TERMINAL WAS
EVACUATED AT NEW YORK'S
LAGUARDIA AIRPORT BECAUSE OF A
SUSPICIOUS PACKAGE.
AND A PLANE TURNED BACK TO THE
GATE AT BOSTON'S LOGAN
INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT BECAUSE A
BAG WASN'T SCREENED PROPERLY.
>> Brown: THIS AFTERNOON, THE
WHITE HOUSE CONFIRMED THE
PRESIDENT WILL ATTEND A MEMORIAL
FOR THE VICTIMS IN BOSTON ON
THURSDAY.
JOINING US FROM BOSTON NOW IS
DAVID BOERI, SENIOR REPORTER FOR
WBUR PUBLIC RADIO.
DAVID, WHAT IF ANYTHING CAN YOU
ADD TO WHERE THE INVESTIGATION
STANDS NOW?
WHAT LEADS MIGHT BE BEING
FOLLOWED?
>> WE HAVE A 12 ACRE CRIME SCENE
HERE SO THEY'RE STILL PORING
THROUGH THAT SCENE.
THERE'S GOING TO BE PROBLEMS
TONIGHT BECAUSE WE'RE EXPECTING
RAIN AND IT IS WINDY AS WELL SO
SOME OF THOSE FRAGMENTS ARE
MOVING AND BLOWING OUT.
BUT THEY ARE WORKING THIS SCENE
AS INTENSIVELY, THEY SAY, AS
THEY'VE WORKED ANY CRIME SCENE.
MEANWHILE, THEY'RE EXPLORING
THEIR THEORIES.
WE HAD A VISIT LAST NIGHT TO AN
APARTMENT IN REVERE.
IT'S BECAUSE ONE OF THE PEOPLE
THAT WAS HOSPITALIZED YESTERDAY
HAD INJURIES ON HIS HANDS, BURNS
ON HIS HANDS THAT WERE
CONSIDERED INCONSISTENT WITH THE
OTHER INJURIES OF OTHER PEOPLE
SO THEY FOLLOWED HIM, HE WAS A
SAUDI NATIONAL, HE WAS IN THE
HOSPITAL, THEY WENT TO HIS
RESIDENCE IN REVERE AND FOUND
TWO OTHER SAUDI NATIONALS.
IT TURNS OUT THEY HAD VISA
PROBLEMS SO IMMIGRATION AND
CUSTOMS ENFORCEMENT TOOK THEM
INTO CUSTODY BUT IT SEEMS AS IF
THIS IS -- THIS IS NOT WHERE THE
INVESTIGATION IS GOING.
BUT YOU GET A SENSE, IN FACT,
THAT THEY'RE CASTING A WIDE NET
LOOKING FOR PEOPLE.
EVIDENCE HAS A SHELF LIFE AND SO
THAT SAVES THEM FROM SPENDING
MORE TIME BY DEALING WITH THOSE
QUICKLY AND MOVING ON.
THAT'S PAST US, BUT THEY'RE
LOOKING FOR MORE.
>> Brown: WHAT ABOUT THE
REPORTS THAT THE BOMBS WERE
COMPOSED OF PRESSURE COOKERS.
>> YEAH.
PRETTY CLEARLY THEY ARE PRESSURE
COOKERS, A GALLON AND A HALF
PRESSURE COOKERS.
NOW, PRESSURE COOKERS MAKE BOTH
RICE AND, AS IT TURNS OUT,
DEVASTATING BOMBS.
YOU CAN SEE RECIPES FOR THEM ON
JIHADI WEB SITES AND ON
ANARCHIST WEB SITES THAT CALL
THEM "HELL -L HOUNDS."
IT'S A POPULAR EXPLOSIVE DEVICE.
WHAT SEEMS TO HAVE HAPPENED HERE
BY PUTTING IT IN THE DUFFEL BAG
AND THE DUFFEL BAG BEING PUT ON
THE GROUND, ACCORDING TO SOURCES
THAT WE'VE TALKED TO, IT MADE
THE DEVASTATION LESS THAN IT
MIGHT HAVE BEEN.
IT BLEW OUTWARDS, MOST OF THE
INJURIES ON THE LEGS WERE FROM
THE KNEE DOWNWARD.
IT COULD HAVE BEEN MUCH WORSE
HAD IT BEEN IN A TIGHT
CONTAINER, I'M TOLD.
>> Brown: WE SAW, DAVID, THAT
LAW ENFORCEMENT IS ASKING THE
PUBLIC FOR HELP IN THE FORM OF
VIDEOS, PHOTOS, ANYTHING.
DO YOU HAVE ANY SENSE OF WHAT
KIND OF RESPONSE THEY'RE
GETTING?
>> THEY'RE GETTING A GREAT
RESPONSE.
THERE ARE HUNDREDS AND THOUSANDS
OF PICTURES AND VIDEOS THAT WERE
TAKEN.
YOU KNOW, THE SOCIAL MEDIA SINCE
9/11 HAS EXPANDED.
EVERYBODY HAS PHONES AND CAMERAS
NOW AND SO THIS IS GOING TO
TAKEN A ENORMOUS AMOUNT OF WORK
IF THEY'RE TRYING TO GO THROUGH
THESE.
THIS COULD BE VERY COMPLICATED.
SOME PEOPLE SUGGEST IT INDICATES
THAT THEY DON'T HAVE A LOT OF
LEADS OTHERWISE.
BUT CERTAINLY THAT'S ONE THING
THAT THEY'RE LOOKING FOR.
>> Brown: SPEAKING OF 9/11, I
WONDER JUST TELL -- GIVE US A
SENSE OF THE MOOD THERE TODAY
AND MAYBE YOU CAN COMPARE IT TO
WHAT HAPPENED AFTER 9/11.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
I REMEMBER 9/12 AND 9/12 WAS A
DAY MUCH LIKE TODAY: BRILLIANT
SKY, WARM.
IN 2001 ON 9/11 BOSTON WAS A
CRIME SCENE THAT HAD NO
EVIDENCE, THERE WERE NO VICTIMS
HERE AND SO IT HAD BEEN ROBBED
IN THAT SENSE.
TODAY JUST THE OPPOSITE.
A TERRIBLE NUMBER OF VICTIMS AND
A LOT OF DEVASTATION AT THAT
SCENE.
>> Brown: AND WE SAID THE
PRESIDENT IS COMING THURSDAY.
WHAT ELSE?
ARE YOU EXPECTING OTHER SERVICES
AND MEMORIALS IN THE COMING
DAYS?
>> YEAH, THERE ARE GOING TO BE
LOTS OF -- WELL, RIGHT NOW WE
HAVE THREE DEAD.
THAT'S THE LATEST.
THERE'S GOING TO BE JUST AN
OUTPOURING IN THIS CITY.
THIS IS -- TO UNDERSTAND JUST
THE IMPACT HERE YOU'VE GOT TO
REMEMBER.
I MEAN, THIS IS THE CELEBRATION
OF PATRIOTS' DAY.
IT'S A LONG TIME NEW ENGLAND
RITUAL AND, OF COURSE, IT'S ONE
OF THE PREMIER, SOME CALL IT THE
PREMIER RUNNING EVENT.
AND THE FACT THAT A RUNNING
EVENT, THE PREMIER RUNNING EVENT
HAD THIS DEVASTATION THAT
RESULTED IN MANY PEOPLE'S LEGS
BEING BLOWN O SADDER AND
IRONIC MORE.
>> Brown: DAVID BOERI OF WBUR
BOSTON.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME.
>> Ifill: STL TOIL COME ON THE
NEWSHOUR, THE INVESTIGATION
GETTING TO THE BOTTOM OF A
COMPLEX CRIME; TREATING THE
WOUNDED; TWEETING A TRAGEDY;
ARGUING TRIBAL RIGHTS; AND
DECIDING WHAT'S TORTURE.
BUT FIRST, WITH THE OTHER NEWS
OF THE DAY, HERE'S HARI
SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: A BIPARTISAN
GROUP OF SENA(XuS TODAY
INTRODUCED A SWEEPING
IMMIGRATION REFORM BILL, AFTER
MONTHS OF NEGOTIATIONS.
BUT IN THE WAKE OF THE BOSTON
BOMBINGS, THEY DELAYED A PUBLIC
ANNOUNCEMENT UNTIL LATER THIS
WEEK.
THE LEGISLATION IS DESIGNED TO
PUT SOME 11 MILLION PEOPLE ON A
PATH TO U.S. CITIZENSHIP, AND TO
INVEST BILLIONS OF DOLLARS IN
STRENGTHENING BORDER SECURITY.
IT ALSO INCLUDES A NEW FARM
WORKER PROGRAM AND VISAS FOR
HIGH-TECH WORKERS.
AMERICAN AIRLINES WAS FORCED TO
GROUND ITS ENTIRE FLEET THIS
AFTERNOON AFTER ITS RESERVATION
SYSTEM WENT DOWN.
THE GROUNDING TRIGGERED MAJOR
TRAVEL DELAYS THAT RIPPLED
THROUGHOUT THE COUNTRY AND
ABROAD.
MANY PASSENGERS, LIKE THOSE AT
AMERICAN'S MAIN HUB IN
DALLAS/FORT WORTH, WERE STUCK ON
PLANES.
OTHER CUSTOMERS WERE UNABLE TO
MAKE OR CHANGE THEIR
RESERVATIONS.
AMERICAN OPERATES MORE THAN
3,500 FLIGHTS WORLDWIDE EACH
DAY.
A SHOWDOWN MAY BE LOOMING IN
VENEZUELA, AFTER A DISPUTED
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION.
PRESIDENT-ELECT NICOLAS MADURO
WARNED TODAY HE WILL NOT ALLOW
AN OPPOSITION MARCH TOMORROW.
HE BLAMED PROTESTERS FOR
MONDAY'S CLASHES THAT KILLED AT
LEAST SEVEN PEOPLE AND INJURED
CITIES.
THE DEMONSTRATORS DEMANDED A
FULL VOTE RECOUNT, SOMETHING
ELECTIONS AUTHORITIES HAVE RULED
OUT.
MADURO CHARGED TODAY IT'S ALL
PART OF A COUP PLOT,
ORCHESTRATED BY OPPOSITION
CANDIDATE HENRIQUE CAPRILES.
>> (translated): THE RESULTS
WERE IMPECCABLE, THEY KNOW IT,
THE GROUP THAT HAS SO MUCH HATE
WITHIN AND THAT YESTERDAY WENT
CRAZY CALLING FOR VIOLENCE FOR
PEOPLE IN THE STREET.
I CAN ANNOUNCE HERE WE HAVE
DEFEATED A COUPE BUT THEY ARE
GOING TO CONTINUE TO
DESTABILIZE.
TODAY I DECLARE THE COUP
DEFEAT.ED
>> Sreenivasan: THE OFFICIAL
RESULTS FROM SUNDAY'S ELECTION
SHOWED MADURO WINNING BY 265,000
VOTES.
OPPOSITION OFFICIALS SAY THEIR
COUNT SHOWS THAT CRILEAPS WON BY
MORE THAN 300,000 VOTES.
A MAJOR EARTHQUAKE STRUCK
SOUTHEASTERN IRAN TODAY, KILLING
DOZENS OF PEOPLE.
THE QUAKE REGISTERED A MAGNITUDE
OF 7.7 AND WAS CENTERED NEAR
SARAVAN, ABOUT 26 MILES FROM THE
PAKISTANI BORDER.
IT FLATTENED HOMES AND KILLED AT
LEAST 34 PEOPLE ON THE PAKISTANI
SIDE.
IN IRAN, STATE MEDIA INITIALLY
REPORTED AT LEAST 46 KILLED, BUT
LATER, DROPPED ANY REFERENCE TO
DEATHS.
IN ECONOMIC NEWS, U.S.
HOMEBUILDERS STARTED WORK ON
MORE THAN A MILLION UNITS IN
MARCH, THE MOST IN NEARLY FIVE
YEARS.
AND ON WALL STREET TODAY, STOCKS
MADE UP A BIG CHUNK OF
YESTERDAY'S LOSSES.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED MORE THAN 157 POINTS TO
CLOSE WELL ABOVE 14,756.
THE NASDAQ ROSE 48 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 3264.
LONG TIME N.F.L. BROADCASTER PAT
SUMMERALL DIED TODAY IN DALLAS.
HE HAD BEEN HOSPITALIZED SINCE
BREAKING A HIP.
HE WORKED AS A BROADCASTER FOR
MORE THAN 40 YEARS AND PLAYED
TEN SEASONS IN THE N.F.L.
FOR 41 OF THOSE YEARS HE CALLED
N.F.L. GAMES WITH JOHN MADDEN.
HE WORKED 16 SOUP SUPER BOWLS,
21 U.S. OPEN TENNIS
CHAMPIONSHIPS.
HE RETIRETIRED IN 2002.
PAT SUMMERALL WAS 82 YEARS OLD.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO GWEN.
>> Ifill: WE RETURN AGAIN TO THE
BOMBINGS IN BOSTON.
TO HELP US ASSESS WHAT WE KNOW
ABOUT THE ATTACK AND EXPLAIN
WHAT INVESTIGATORS ARE LOOKING
FOR NOW, WE TURN TO JUAN ZUARTE,
WHO WAS DEPUTY NATIONAL SECURITY
ADVISER FOR TERRORISM UNDER
PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH, AND IS
NOW THE CENTER FOR STRATEGIC AND
INTERNATIONAL STUDIES.
AND DON BORELLI, A 25-YEAR
F.B.I. ADVISER WHO IS NOW CHIEF
OPERATING OFFICER OF THE SOUFAN
GROUP, WHICH CONSULTS ON
SECURITY MATTERS.
JUAN ZUARTE, THE PRESIDENT SAID
TODAY THE INVESTIGATION IS IN
ITEN FANCY BUT WE KNOW THERE WAS
A PRESSURE COOKER INVOLVED,
THERE MAY HAVE BEEN B.B.s
INVOLVED, SHRAPNEL AND THAT
MAYBE A CIRCUIT BOARD WAS FOUND
THAT WAS USED AS A TIMER.
WHAT DOES THIS TELL US ABOUT THE
SOURCE OF THIS EXPLOSION?
>> WELL, GWEN, THIS IS PART OF
THE FORENSIC WORK THAT HAPPENS
NOW AND WHAT AUTHORITIES ARE
LOOKING FOR ARE SIGNATURES IN
THE DEVICES THEMSELVES THAT CAN
GIVE THEM SOME CLUES AS TO WHO
MAY HAVE BEEN BEHIND THE
ATTACKS.
WHAT TTE
DATE, WHAT WE KNOW IS THIS WAS
DESIGNED TO HAVE MAXIMUM EFFECT.
EVEN THOUGH THE EXPLOSIVE CHARGE
ITSELF WASN'T MASSIVE.
IT WAS DESIGNED WITH THE BALL
BEARINGS AND NAILS AND OTHER
SHRAPNEL TO HAVE MAXIMUM IMPACT
UPON EXPLOSION AND SO WHAT THAT
TELLS US IS THAT THIS IS MORE
THAN THE WORK OF A MERE AMATEUR
BUT IT'S CERTAINLY NOT
SOPHISTICATED ENOUGH TO TELL US
THAT IT'S THE WORK OF A
BOMB-MAKING MASTERMIND AND SO
THIS, AGAIN, IS HELPFUL, IT'S
PROBATIVE, BUT IT DOESN'T GIVE
AUTHORITIES ENOUGH TO DETERMINE
IF WE'RE TALKING ABOUT A LONE
WOLF ACTOR OR A DOWN-SIZED AL
QAEDA-INSPIRED ATTACK.
>> Ifill: DON BORRELLI, YOU
WERE ON THE NEW YORK CITY JOINT
TERRORISM TASK FORCE AND WE NOW
KNOW THAT THERE ARE MAYBE 2,000
TIPS OR MORE COMING INTO THE
BOSTON POLICE DEPARTMENTND A THE
F.B.I. IS HELPFUL?
IS IT A LOT TO GET THROUGH?
>> IT'S BOTH.
WE'VE SEEN IN CONTEXT OF THE
MEDICAL TEAMS TALKING ABOUT THE
WORD TRIAGE, WHERE THEY HAD TO
TRIAGE THE WOUNDED INDIVIDUALS.
THIS IS THE THEORY GOING ON NOW
WITH THE F.B.I.
THEY'RE GETTING THOUSANDS OF
LEADS FROM CITIZENS FROM
INFORMANTS, FROM OUR PARTNERS
OVERSEAS, FROM EVERYWHERE AND
THEY'VE GOT TO PRIORITIZE THOSE
LEADS AND TRIAGE THEM AND WORK
THE MOST POSITIVE ONES FIRST AND
THE ONES THAT ARE POTENTIALLY
PERISHABLE.
>> Ifill: WE HAVE BEEN
WATCHING J,UAN ZUARTE,
INVESTIGATORS LITERALLY COMBING
THE STREETS ON THEIR HANDS AND
KNEES, PICKING UP EVERY LITTLE
THING.
IF IT RAINS TONIGHT AS THE
REPORTER WITH BURR IS SAYING,
DOES THAT IMPEDE THE
INVESTIGATION?
>> IT WILL A BIT.
THE CRIME SCENE IS OUTSIDE.
THE WIND AND THE RAIN AND THE
ELEMENTS NO DOUBT WILL HAVE AN
IMPACT SO THE F.B.I.
INVESTIGATORS, THE FEDERAL AND
STATE AUTHORITIES WILL R NO
DOUBT DOING EVERYTHING POSSIBLE
TO GATHER BITS OF INFORMATION
AND DEBT RAOEUTS ON THE GROUND
BEFORE THE RAINS HIT.
BUT IN ADDITION AS WE'VE HEARD
THEY'RE TALKING TO WITNESSES,
THEY'RE LOOKING -- THE
INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY IS
LOOKING BACK AT INTEL.
WE'VE HEARD, FOR EXAMPLE, GWEN,
THERE WAS NO CHATTER BEFORE THE
EVENT BUT KEEP IN MIND THAT
BEFORE THE UNDERWEAR BOMBER,
UMAR FAROUK ABDULMUTALLAB, WHO
TRIED TO EXPLODE THE UNDERWEAR
BOMB OVER DETROIT THERE WAS ALSO
AT LEAST INITIALLY A SENSE THERE
WASN'T CHATTER BEFORE BUT UPON
RETROSPECT THERE WERE BITS AND
PIECES OF INTELLIGENCE DATA THAT
HAD NOT BEEN PUT TOGETHER SO
IT'S FORENSIC WORK ON THE GROUND
BUT INTELLIGENCE WORK
RETROSPECTIVELY AND
PROSPECTIVELY.
>> Ifill: DON BORRELLI, WE
DON'T HAVE ENOUGH INFORMATION TO
GET INTO TOO MUCH SPECULATION
BUT BASED ON YOUR EXPERIENCE
WITH INVESTIGATING THESE TYPES
OF CRIMES IS THERE ANY -- ARE
THERE ANY SIGNS HERE THAT THIS
IS A DOMESTICALLY HOMEGROWN KIND
OF ACTIVITY OR THIS SOMETHING
THAT WOULD ONLY BE DONE BY AL
QAEDA OR SOMEONE ELSE WHO WOULD
USUALLY CLAIM RESPONSIBILITY?
>> IT'S -- IN MINUTE IT'S WAY TO
EARLY TO TELL.
THERE ARE SOME THINGS THAT WOULD
LEND ME TO THINK THAT IT'S MAYBE
MORE HOMEGROWN JUST BECAUSE OF
THE TYPE OF DEVICES USED.
AS MR. ZUARTE SAID, THESE
WEREN'T OVERLY SOPHISTICATED
DEVICES.
THEY WERE EFFECTIVE, BUT NOT THE
TYPE OF THINGS THAT WE'VE SEEN
WHEN INDIVIDUALS TRAVEL TO
PAKISTAN, AFGHANISTAN AND GET
THE TRAINING, FOR EXAMPLE, YOU
COMPARE IT TO THE ATTEMPTED NEW
YORK CITY SUBWAY PLOT IN 2009
WITWHERE THE MAN WAS GOING TO UE
T.A.T.P. WHICH HE LEARNED TO
MAKE OVERSEAS.
SO THAT WAS A BIT MORE -- TOOK
MORE TRAINING, MORE COMPLICATED
AND HAD THAT INTERNATIONAL
ASPECT TO IT WHEREAS THIS -- AS
WE'VE SEEN AND HEARD YOU CAN GET
THE RECIPE FOR THIS -- THESE
PRESSURE COOKER BOMBS ON THE
INTERNET ANYWHERE.
>> Ifill: JUAN ZUARTE, YOU
WORK MISDEMEANOR THE WHITE
HOUSE.
IS IT SIGNIFICANT THAT THE
PRESIDENT TODAY CHOSE TO USE THE
WDOR "TERRORISM" AND "TERROR"
WITH THE WHEN HE DIDN'T
YESTERDAY?
>> IT HAS POLITICAL
SIGNIFICANCE.
KEEP IN MIND THE U.S. GOVERNMENT
HAS A DEFINITION UNDER CRIMINAL
LAW AND OTHERWISE FOR WHAT
TERRORIS ISM.
I THINK INITIALLY THE PRESIDENT
WANTED TO BE VERY CAREFUL NOT TO
BE THE FIRST FACT WITNESS AS TO
WHAT WAS HAPPENING, NOT
COMMITTING TO ANY SET OF FACTS
OR CRITERIA.
BUT I THINK OBVIOUSLY SEEING
WHAT HAD HAPPENED, UNDERSTANDING
WHAT THE F.B.I. WAS STARTING TO
SEE, UNDERSTANDING THE NATURE OF
THESE EXPLOSIVE DEVICES THAT HE
WAS COMFORTABLE AND I PROBABLY
FELT A LITTLE BIT OF POLITICAL
PRESSURE TO CALL WHAT IT IT IS,
WHICH IS AN ACT OF TERROR.
THE REAL TRICK HERE IS THE WHITE
HOUSE WANTING TO CALIBRATE THE
JUDGMENT, NOT WANTING TO JUMP TO
CONCLUSIONS AND ALSO WANTING TO
SEND A MESSAGE OF NATIONAL
RESILIENCE WHICH IS SOMETHING
YOU'VE HEARD CONSISTENTLY NOT
JUST FROM THE WHITE HOUSE BUT
FROM HOMELAND AND
COUNTERTERRORISM OFFICIALS FOR
THE LAST COUPLE OF YEARS.
>> Ifill: DON BORRELLI, AS THE
NATION STRUGGLES TO FIND THE
BALANCE BETWEEN THAT KIND OF
RESILIENCY AND AWARENESS OF WHAT
MIGHT BE GOING ON, DOES IT
MATTER THAT THIS IS A DIFFERENT
KIND OF VENUE?
THAT IS TO SAY A BIG SPECTATOR
EVENT WHERE SOMEONE KNEW THERE
WAS GOING TO BE A LOT OF
ATTENTION PAID?
>> WELL, THERE'S -- YOU KNOW,
IT'S A DOUBLE-EDGED SWORD.
THE FACT THAT THERE ARE SO MANY
SPECTATORS, SO MANY CAMERAS THAT
GIVES THE INVESTIGATIVE TEAM
THAT MANY MORE LEADS BECAUSE, AS
WE'VE HEARD, THERE'S BEEN SO
MUCH ASSISTANCE FROM THE
CITIZENS SENDING IN THEIR FILMS,
THEIR STILLS, THE VIDEO CAMERAS.
ON THE OTHER HAND WE ALWAYS LOOK
AT THESE MAJOR EVENTS AS AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR A TERRORIST TO
STRIKE SO WHETHER IT'S THE SUPER
BOWL, THE MARATHON, NEW YORK NEW
YEAR'S EVE, WHEN YOU HAVE A LOT
OF PEOPLE IN SOMEONE SPACE AND A
LOT OF MEDIA COVERAGE, THIS IS A
RECIPE FOR A TERRORIST ATTACK
SHOULD THEY WANT TO TAKE
ADVANTAGE OF IT BECAUSE IT NOT
ONLY -- YOU CAN INFLICT DAMAGE
ON A LOT OF PEOPLE BUT WITH THE
EYES OF THE WORLD WATCHING YOU
CAN REALLY IS THAT PSYCHOLOGICAL
IMPACT AS WELL.
>> Ifill: LET ME ASK YOU TO
FOLLOW UP ON THAT.
WITH THE EYES OF THE WORLD
WATCHING THE OFFICIALS IN BOSTON
HAVE MADE A REPEATED ATTEMPT TO
GET PEOPLE TO GIVE UP THEIR
PICTURES, THEIR VIDEOS, THEIR
CELL PHONE PHOTOS.
HOW -- IS THAT WHAT THEY HAVE TO
RELY ON NOW TO BREAK THIS CASE?
IS THAT WHY THEY'RE MAKING THAT
PUBLIC APPEAL?
>> I THINK THEY'RE NOT RELYING
ON ANY ONE INVESTIGATIVE
TECHNIQUE BUT THEY'RE EXPLORING
ALL OPTIONS.
THEY'RE GOING TO BE USING
PHOTOGRAPHS, THEY'RE GOING TO BE
USING EYEWITNESS STATEMENTS,
INFORMANTS, TECHNICAL
INFORMATION, MAYBE CELL PHONE,
WHAT WAS GOING ON IN THE CELL
PHONE TOWERS BEFORE AND AFTER
THE BOMBINGS.
SO, YOU KNOW, IT'S NOT JUST THE
PICTURES, THAT'S A PIECE OF IT.
BUT YOU HAVE TO LOOK AT EVERY
AVENUE THAT COULD GIVE YOU
POTENTIAL INFORMATION TO GO OUT
AND PURSUE FURTHER LEADS.
>> Ifill: JUAN ZUARTE, WE'RE
NO LONGER DEPENDING ON CLAIMS OF
RESPONSIBILITY BY SHADOWY
FIGURES ANYMORE?
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
THE FACT THAT YOU DON'T HAVE
CLAIMS OR A SINGH TKHOUR THE
NATURE OF THE STRIKE ITSELF
MAKES IT ALL TOGETHER MORE
DIFFICULT TO DETERMINE
RESPONSIBILITY AND ATTRIBUTE TO
ATTACK AND I THINK UNFORTUNATELY
THAT'S THE WORLD WE LIVE IN IN
TERMS OF TERRORISM.
IT CAN BE TERRORISTS OF ANY
IDEOLOGICAL STRIPE, IT COULD BE
A LONE WOLF ACTOR, A NETWORK SET
OF ACTORS AND I THINK THAT'S
UNFORTUNATELY THE WORLD WE LIVE
IN.
>> Ifill: IS IT FAIR TO SAY WE
HAVE TO BE PREPARED FOR THIS
INVESTIGATION TO CONTINUE FOR
SOME TIME?
>> I THINK THAT'S RIGHT.
WE NEED TO LOOK BACK, FOR
EXAMPLE, TO THE 1990s WHERE
YOU HAD DOMESTIC TERRORIST
ATTACKS THAT TOOK A LONG TIME TO
FIGURE OUT.
REMEMBER THE MANHUNT FOR ERIC
RUDOLPH, THE CENTENNIAL BOMBER,
SOMETHING SIMILAR TO THIS
ATTACK.
THE UNABOMBER IT TOOK A WHILE TO
FIGURE OUT WHO WAS BEHIND IT.
WE'VE GROWN ACCUSTOMED TO THE AL
QAEDA STYLE ATTACKS WHERE THEY
CLAIM RESPONSIBILITY, WHERE
THERE ARE SIGNATURES TO IT,
FAIRLY EASY TO ATTRIBUTE.
WHERE THE RESPONSIBILITY AND
ATTRIBUTIONS ACTUALLY PART OF
THE POLITICAL PROGRAM AND
MESSAGING FROM THE TERRORIST
GROUP.
THIS MAY BE A CASE WHERE THE
PEOPLE WHO PERPETRATED IT DON'T
WANT TO BE FOUND AND THAT WILL
PROVE DIFFICULT FOR THE
INVESTIGATION.
>> Ifill: JUAN ZUARTE AND DON
BORRELLI, THANK YOU BOTH SO
MUCH.
>> Brown: NOW, A FIRSTHAND
ACCOUNT OF THE EMERGENCY
MEDICINE ADMINISTERED TO
VICTIMS, AND THE CHALLENGES
THEY'LL BE FACING.
PATIENTS WERE SENT TO SEVEN
HOSPITALS ACROSS BOSTON
YESTERDAY, INCLUDING
MASSACHUSETTS GENERAL.
DR. ALASDAIR CONN HEADS THE
HOSPITAL'S DEPARTMENT OF
EMERGENCY MEDICINE.
HARI SPOKE WITH HIM A SHORT TIME
AGO.
>> Sreenivasan: DR. KHAN,
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOIN US.
WHAT CAN YOU TELL US ON THE
STATUS OF THE PATIENTS THAT YOU
HAVE?
>> WE HAVE 12 PATIENTS THAT WERE
ADMITTED TO THE HOSPITAL
YESTERDAY FOLLOWING THIS
EXPLOSION.
LAST NIGHT WE LISTED EIGHT AS
CRITICAL AND WE'RE NOW LISTING
SEVEN AS CRITICAL, ALTHOUGH
WE'RE HOPING THAT ONE WILL
IMPROVE OVERNIGHT, SO THAT WILL
LEAVE US WITH SIX.
FOUR OF THE PATIENTS,
UNFORTUNATELY, HAD AN AMPUTATION
OF ONE OF THEIR LOWER
EXTREMITIES.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT TYPES OF
INJURIES ARE YOU SEEING IN WE'VE
HEARD SO MUCH ABOUT THESE LOWER
EXTREMITIES.
ONE OF YOUR COLLEAGUES SAID THAT
YOU'RE COMPLETING THE JOB THAT
THE BOMB BEGAN.
THAT'S CORRECT.
>> THA +*FRPBLGT WHEN THEY ARRID
THEY WERE COMPLETE AM STATIONS
AND IT WAS VERY OBVIOUS IN THE
EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT AND
SUBSEQUENTLY IN THE OPERATING
ROOM THAT THERE WAS SO MUCH
DAMAGE THAT THESE COULD NOT BE
REATTACHED, IF YOU LIKE.
AND SO BASICALLY WE WERE
COMPLETING WHAT THE EXPLOSION
HAD ALREADY DONE.
THE OTHER INJURIES DID REQUIRE
-- THERE SEEMED TO BE A LOT OF
METAL FRAGMENTS FROM THE
EXPLOSIVE DEVICE AND THESE
CAUSED A LOT OF DAMAGE TO THE
MUSCULATURE IN PARTICULARLY ONE
PATIENT TO THE BLOOD VESSELSES
SUPPLYING THE LOWER EXTREMITY.
WE DID HAVE ONE OF THE VASCULAR
SURGEONS REPAIR THE BLOOD
VESSELS SO WE'RE HOPEFUL THAT WE
WILL BE ABLE TO SALVAGE THAT
LIMB.
IT'S STILL A LITTLE BIT OF EARLY
DAYS, THOUGH.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT HAPPENS
TO SOME OF THAT SHRAPNEL?
IS IT GOING INTO THE HANDS OF
FEDERAL INVESTIGATORS TRYING TO
PIECE TOGETHER?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
ANY MATERIAL THAT IS GOING TO
HELP IN THIS INVESTIGATION WAS
HANDD FROM THE OPERATING ROOM TO
THE APPROPRIATE AUTHORITIES FOR
THEM TO OBVIOUSLY SEE WHAT THEY
CAN DETERMINE ABOUT THE PEOPLE
WHO LED TO THIS TRAGEDY.
>> Sreenivasan: AND WHEN YOU
SAY "METAL OBJECTS," WHUZ WHAT
DOES THAT MEAN?
ARE THESE SHARP LIKE NAILS?
ROUND LIKE B.B.s?
WHAT WAS IN THERE?
>> THE ONE THING THAT IMPRESSED
ME LOOKING AT THE C.T. SCANS AND
THE X-RAYS AS SOON AS WE HAD
THEM DEVELOPED WAS THE NUMBER OF
SMALL LIKE B.B.s THAT WERE IN
THE WOUNDS.
NOT ONLY THE LOWER EXTREMITIES
BUT IN SOME PATIENTS ELSEWHERE
ON THE BODY.
AND DR. VELMAHOS WHO DID A LOT
OF THE SURGERY WAS SAYING SOME
METAL OBJECTS APPEARED TO BE
LIKE NAILS THAT THAT THE HEAD
HAD BEEN CUT OFF IN SOME WAY.
SO, AGAIN, ALL OF THESE WERE
COLLECTED WHEN WE REMOVED THEM
FROM THE PATIENTS AND GIVE THEM
TO THE AUTHORITIES FROM THE
OPERATING ROOM.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU'RE THE
CHIEF OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
EMERGENCY MEDICINE, YOU TRAIN
FOR SOMETHING LIKE THIS BUT HOW
DIFFERENT IS IT WHEN IT COMES TO
YOUR DOOR?
>> WE TRAIN FOR IT.
WE'RE VERY FORTUNATE IN BOSTON,
WE'VE GONE THROUGH A LOT OF
DISASTER DRILLS.
BUT THIS WAS THE REAL THING.
WE CERTAINLY SEE HORRIFIC
INJURIES BUT IT'S USUALLY ONE
PATIENT AT A TIME AND YESTERDAY
12 PATIENTS IN THE COURSE OF
LESS THAN AN HOUR.
FORTUNATELY WE WERE ABLE TO
MOBILIZE THE RESOURCES AND
WITHIN JUST A FEW MINUTES WE HAD
FIVE PATIENTS FROM THE EMERGENCY
DEPARTMENT RIGHT UP TO THE
OPERATING ROOM.
AND THOSE WERE OBVIOUSLY THE
MOST CRITICAL PATIENTS.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT'S NEXT
FOR THESE CRITICAL PATIENTS?
WHAT ARE YOU LOOKING FOR AND
WATCHING OUT FOR IN THE NEXT 24,
48 HOURS?
>> WHAT WE DO IN THE FIRST
OPERATION IS OBVIOUSLY SALVAGE
AS MUCH VIABLE TISSUE AS WE CAN.
THE PATIENTS WILL BE TAKEN BACK
TO THE OPERATING ROOM ALMOST ON
A DAILY BASIS AND WE'LL BE
CLEANING OUT THE WOUNDS,
EVENTUALLY DOING TISSUE
TRANSFERS TO COVER THE WOUNDS,
SKIN GRAFTS IN OTHER PATIENTS
AND WAITING UNTIL WE CAN GET
COMPLETE COVERAGE OF THE WOUNDS.
WE'RE HOPEFUL THAT THE -- NO
MORE PATIENTS WILL LOSE A LOWER
EXTREMITY, THAT'S WHAT WE'RE
HOPING FOR.
AND THAT THE PEOPLE WHO HAVE
LOST THEIR LOWER EXTREMITY
ULTIMATELY WILL BE ABLE TO BE
FITTED WITH A PROSTHETIC LIMB.
I WILL SAY, ONE OF THE
ORTHOPEDIC SURGEONS HERE HAS
RECEIVED CALLS FROM PATIENTS WHO
HE'S PREVIOUSLY OPERATED ON
CALLING UP AND SAYING "LOOK,
I'VE BEEN LIVING WITH MY
ARTIFICIAL LEG, I HAVE A FULL
LIFE, I CAN WALK, I CAN RUN, I
CAN JOG.
I WOULD LOVE TO COME IN WHEN THE
TIME IS RIGHT AND HELP PEOPLE
INITIATE THEIR REHABILITATION
PROCESS."
>> Sreenivasan: I KNOW YOU HAD
SENT SOME OF YOUR PATIENTS
ACROSS FOR EAR DAMAGE.
WAS THAT FROM THE EXPLOSION?
>> YES, IT WAS.
A BLAST INJURY, IF THEY'RE VERY
CLOSE TO THE EXPLOSION, IT CAN
LITERALLY RUPTURE THE EARDRUM
AND THOSE PATIENTS WE SENT
ACROSS TO THE MASSACHUSETTS EYE
AND EAR INFIRMARY TO HAVE THEIR
EARS MORE APPROPRIATELY MANAGED.
>> Sreenivasan: ARE THERE WILL
DANGERS OF CONCUSSION WOUNDS FOR
ALL OF THESE PATIENTS, TOO?
>> THEY WERE IN DANGER BUT AFTER
EVALUATION HERE WE FELT
COMFORTABLE THAT THEY DIDN'T
HAVE ANY SEVERE CONCUSSION AND
THAT WE WANTED TO GET THEM
EXAMINED TO DETERMINE IF THERE
WAS ANY DAMAGE TO THEIR TYMPANIC
MEMBRANES AND THEIR HEARING.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT
THINGS LIKE BLOOD PRESSURE
CONSIDERING THE LOSS OF BLOOD
AND LIMBS AND SO FORTH.
HOW DO YOU REGULATE THAT?
>> WELL, CERTAINLY ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT IS GRATIFYING WAS
THE WAY THAT E.M.S. AND ALL OF
THE PERSONNEL ON THE SCENE
BROUGHT THE VARY SEVERELY
INJURED PATIENTS TO OUR
EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT AND TO
OTHER LEVEL ONE TRAUMA CENTERS
WITHIN THE CITY IN A VERY FAST
MANNER.
ONE OR TWO PATIENTS HAD VERY LOW
BLOOD PRESSURE WHEN THEY
ARRIVED.
WE GAVE THEM BLOOD IN THE
EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT TO BRING UP
THEIR BLOOD PRESSURE AND THEN
SENT THEM IMMEDIATELY UP STAIRS.
AND OBVIOUSLY THE TREATMENT IS
TO STOP THE BLEEDING, CONTROL
THE HEMORRHAGE AND THEN GIVE
THEM BLOOD TRANSFUSIONS TO BRING
THEIR BLOOD PRESSURE UP AND
NORMALIZE.
>> Sreenivasan: DR. CONN IN AN
ODD WAY A DOCTOR I SPOKE TO
YESTERDAY SAID IT COULDN'T HAVE
HAPPENED IN A BETTER LOCATION.
THERE WAS ALMOST AN ENTIRE
MEDICAHOSPL ITAL THERE AT THE
FINISH LINE.
>> THAT'S CORRECT.
WE HAD -- WE HAVE SOME OF OUR
PHYSICIANS AND NURSES WERE
MANNING SOME OF THE MEDICAL
TENTS ALONG THE WAY AND
OBVIOUSLY AS THESE -- THIS
EXPLOSION OCCURRED THINGS TOOK A
RATHER MORE SERIOUS TURN.
ONE OF OUR TRAUMA SURGEONS
ACTUALLY RAN THE MARATHON AND
WHEN HE FINISHED REALIZED WHAT
WAS HAPPENING AND CAME IN TO
OPERATE ON SOME OF THE PATIENTS.
>> Sreenivasan: WOW.
DR. ALASDIAR CONN, THANKS SO
MUCH FOR YOUR TIME.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: TECHNOLOGY CHANGED THE
SPEED AND THE ACCURACY WITH
WHICH WE LEARNED OF THE BOSTON
ATTACKS.
BUT IT ALSO QUICKLY BECAME A
PLATFORM FOR THE NATION'S SHOCK
AND GRIEF.
NEWSHOUR POLITICAL EDITOR
CHRISTINA BELLANTONI TALKED WITH
OUR DAILY DOWNLOAD TEAM ABOUT
THAT.
>> FOR THAT LOOK AT HOW
TECHNOLOGY FACTORED INTO
YESTERDAY'S TRAGEDY I'M JOINED
BY LAUREN ASHBURN AND HOWARD
KURTZ, "NEWSWEEK'S" WASHINGTON
BUREAU CHIEF AND HOST OF CNN'S
"RELIABLE SOURCES."
THANKS FOR BEING HERE.
AFTER 9/11 WE SAW PEOPLE
PHYSICALLY PUTTING UP PHOTOS OF
THEIR MISSING LOVED ONES IN
LOWER MANHATTAN.
YESTERDAY THE INTERNET PROVIDED
A SENSE OF COMFORT FOR SOME.
WHAT DID WE SEE?
>> WELL, GOOGLE PERSON FINDER
FACTORED INTO THIS.
WE HAVE A GRAPH THAT I CAN SHOW
YOU AT IWHT LOOKS LIKE.
THERE'S A BIG BUTTON THAT SAYS
"I'M LOOKING FOR.
REQUESTS YOU CAN TYPE IN THE
NAME OF SOMEBODY.
OR "I HAVE INFORMATION ABOUT"
AND YOU CAN ALSO TYPE IN THE
NAME OF SOMEONE.
THEN YOU CAN TAKE THIS TOOL AND
EMBED IT ON YOUR OWN WEB SITE.
SO IN THE AFTERMATH OF DISASTER,
HOWIE, IT REALLY SEEMS LIKE THIS
TOOL AND OTHERS ARE MUCH MORE
EFFECTIVE THAN GOING TO THE
BULLETIN BOARD NEAR THE WORLD
TRADE TOWERS AND SCANNING THE
PICTURES.
>> AND THE TONE OF TWITTER WHERE
THERE WERE ABOUT FIVE MILLION
TWEETS IN 24 HOURS ACCORD TO THE
WEAPON SITE WAS VERY STRIKING
BECAUSE IN THE BEGINNING WHEN
TWITTER WAS YOUNG JOURNALISTS
LOOKED DOWN THEIR NOSE, WELL,
ANYBODY CAN POST ANYTHING, HOW
DO WE KNOW IT'S TRUE?
OFTEN THINGS WERE NOT TRUE.
WHILE THERE WERE EXAMPLES OF
EXCESSES AND PARTISANSHIP I
FOUND A REALLY -- TWITTER HAS
ALMOST GROWN UP.
THERE WAS A TONE OF RESTRAINT
AND PEOPLE SAYING THEY WERE NOT
GOING TO RETWEET EVERY LAST BIT
OF SPECULATION AND EVEN
CRITICIZING THE MAINSTREAM MEDIA
FOR SPECULATING ABOUT WHO WAS
BEHIND IT.
>> JOURNALISTS DID THAT, TOO.
>> THERE WAS A LOT OF
MISINFORMATION ABOUT THERE.
YOU SEE THAT IN THE WAKE OF
DIFFERENT TRAGEDIES.
>> NOT SO MUCH NOW, THOUGH.
YOU REMEMBER HURRICANE SANDY
WHEN THERE WERE DOCTORED
PICTURES OF A SHARK SWIMMING
THROUGH A NEW JERSEY
NEIGHBORHOOD AND THE CALL, AS
HOWIE SAID HERE, WAS FOR
RESTRAINT.
A LOT OF JOURNALISTS AND OTHER
PEOPLE SAYING "DON'T RETWEET
THINGS THAT YOU DON'T KNOW TO BE
TRUE."
>> THERE WAS THE "NEW YORK POST"
MISTAKENLY REPORTING FOR EXAMPLE
THAT THE DEATH TOLL WAS 12 AND
SAYING THERE WAS A SAUDI SUSPECT
WHEN THAT WAS UNCONFIRMED.
TWITTER SPANK IT HAD NEWS
ORGANIZATIONS THAT WENT OFF THE
RAILS.
>> AND ON FACEBOOK THIS BECAME A
SITE WHERE PEOPLE COULD CHECK IN
ON THEIR FRIENDS THAT WERE
RUNNING THE MARATHON OR PEOPLE
THAT LIVED UP THERE.
YOU ALSO SAW LIKE THIS ONLINE
TRIBUTE THAT WAS CREATED BY A
D.C.-BASED DESIGNER MATT ORTEGA.
HE POSTED THESE SPORTS THEMED
FACEBOOK IMAGES THAT YOU COULD
SHARE WITH YOUR FRIENDS TO SHOW
SOLIDARITY THERE.
>> I SAW LOTS OF POPLEES PUT
TOGETHER, -- MEMES PUT TOGETHER,
A HEART OF THE CITY PUT TOGETHER
THAT SAID "WE LOVE YOU" THAT HAD
THE MAP OF THE CITY ON IT.
IT WAS AN OUTPOURING OF LOVE AS
THERE IS OFTEN TIMES IN THIS
TRAGEDY.
BUT THERE WAS ALSO NOT SOME VERY
HELPFUL THINGS.
THERE WAS AN UNDERSCORE BOSTON
MARATHON ON TWITTER THAT WAS
TAKEN DOWN WITHIN AN HOUR
BECAUSE IT WAS FAKE, THEY WERE
ASKING FOR MONEY AND WE'VE SEEN
THAT A LOT IN THE PAST.
BUT THIS ONE WAS CAUGHT VERY
QUICKLY.
>> AND NOT JUST ON FACEBOOK BUT
AS YOU WERE SAYING BEFORE WE
CAME ON THE AIR ON TUMBLR AND
INSTAGRAM YOU HAD A SENSE OF
COMMUNITY SHARING OF FEELING,
SHARING SYMPATHY.
IT USED TO BE TELEVISION WAS THE
PLACE WHERE EVERYBODY GATHERED
AROUND THE HEARTH AND TELEVISION
PLAYED A VERY IMPORTANT ROLE,
BROADCAST NETWORKS GOING
WALL-TO-WALL FOR A WHILE BUT NOW
YOU SEE THAT MUCH MORE ONLINE.
>> EVEN OUR OWN MR. ROGERS FROM
PBS, THIS QUOTE HE SAID ABOUT
FINDING THE HELPERS, THAT'S A
WAY TO COMFORT CHILDREN IN TIMES
OF TRAGEDY WAS GOING VIRAL.
>> I FOUND IT VERY INTERESTING
ALSO WHO WAS FIRST, YOU KNOW?
JOURNALISM, PART OF THE PROBLEM
IN BREAKING NEWS STORIES IS THAT
EVERYBODY RUSHES TO BE FIRST.
WELL, HERE IT WAS A TWITTER
PICTURE OF SOMEONE SAYING "HOLY
COW" AND HASHTAG EXPLOSION.
AND THAT WAS AT 2:50 P.M. ON
MONDAY AND THEN THE BOSTON
POLICE DEPARTMENT DIDN'T CONFIRM
IT UNTIL 3:39!
TWITTER HAD THE ACTUAL PICTURES
AND EYEWITNESS ACCOUNTS AND T.V.
AND RADIO AND THE NET HAD TO
REALLY PLAY CASH-UP.
>> THERE WERE MORE PEOPLE
TWEETING THAN THERE ARE
JOURNALISTS IN THE WORLD.
>> AND YOU SAW SOME ACTUAL
PHYSICAL TRIBUTES LIKE THIS
LIGHT BRIGADE PICTURE THAT WE
HAVE HERE, THE OVERPASS LIGHT
BRIGADE.
THIS WAS SOMETHING THAT WAS
REALLY SHARED A LOT ON SOCIAL
MEDIA AS WELL.
>> AND THERE WERE OTHER ONES,
TOO, LIKE THAT.
IN DIFFERENT CITIES, THERE WAS
ONE IN NEW YORK THAT SAID "N.Y.
HEART" AND THEN A "B." IN THE
BOSTON RED SOX LOGO.
>> YOU MENTIONED THE BOSTON
POLICE DEPARTMENT.
THAT WAS VERY AGGRESSIVE IN
USING ONLINE IN TWITTER.
>> LET'S TALK MORE ABOUT HOW
INVESTIGATORS ARE SOLICITING
THIS INFORMATION FROM CROWDS VIA
SOCIAL NETWORKING.
THIS TWEET FROM THE BOSTON
POLICE DEPARTMENT SAYING THAT
THEY'RE LOOKING FOR VIDEO OF THE
FINISH LINE.
THIS IS UNUSUAL.
>> THEY USED IT MORE.
WHAT I FOUND INTERESTING IS IF
YOU LOOKED AT THE BOSTON POLICE
DEPARTMENT'S TWITTER FEED, AT
1:38 IN THE AFTERNOON THEY PUT
UP A PICTURE OF RUNNERS AT THE
FINISH LINE AND AT -- BY THE
TIME IT WAS 3:39 THEY CAME OUT
WITH THE ANNOUNCEMENT, THEY USED
THAT TWITTER FEED TO GET OUT
INFORMATION LIKE A COMMISSIONER
WHAT HE'S SAYING, WHAT AREAS ARE
CLOSED, WHAT YOU CAN DO FOR
LOVED ONES, WHERE YOU CAN FIND
THINGS.
AND THE MASSACHUSETTS EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT AGENCY SAID IF YOU'RE
HAVING A PROBLEM WITH YOUR CELL
PHONE USE YOUR TEXTING AND THAT
HAS LESS BANDWIDTH.
>> BUT CELL SERVICE WAS SHUT
DOWN FOR A WHILE AFTER THE
BOMBINGS, THIS WAS THE WAY TO
COMMUNICATE FOR THE POLICE AND
FOR PEOPLE USING SOCIAL MEDIA.
>> LAUREN ASHBURN, HOWIE KURTZ,
THANKS VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: TRIBAL LAW, FEDERAL
LAW, AND THE FATE OF A YOUNG
GIRL: THE SUPREME COURT HEARD A
RARE CHILD CUSTODY CASE TODAY.
RAY SUAREZ HAS THAT.
>> Suarez: THE LITTLE GIRL AT
THE CENTER OF THIS CASE IS KNOWN
AS "BABY VERONICA."
SHE'S CAUGHT IN A CUSTODY
BATTLE, THE KIND OF CASE
NORMALLY HEARD IN LOCAL COURTS.
BUT THE CASE WAS HEARD TODAY BY
HIGH COURT JUSTICES SINCE IT
RAISES LARGER QUESTIONS ABOUT
FEDERAL LAW BECAUSE THE GIRL IS
PART CHEROKEE INDIAN.
THE INDIAN CHILD WELFARE ACT WAS
PASSED IN 1978 TO PROTECT
CHILDREN AND THE STABILITY OF
INDIAN TRIBES.
IT ALLOWS TRIBAL INVOLVEMENT IN
CUSTODY DECISIONS, SO INDIAN
CHILDREN AREN'T UNNECESSARILY
REMOVED FROM THEIR ETHNIC
ORIGINS.
MARCIA COYLE OF THE "NATIONAL
LAW JOURNAL" WAS IN THE
COURTROOM THIS MORNING, AND IS
BACK WITH US TONIGHT.
MARCIA, WHEN PEOPLE HEAR
"CUSTODY BATTLE" THEY TEND TO
THINK MOTHER VERSUS FATHER BUT
THIS WAS KIND OF A THREE OR EVEN
FOUR-WAY LEGAL ARGUMENT, WASN'T
IT?
>> ABSOLUTELY, RAY.
YOU HAD THE LAWYER FOR THE
ADOPTIVE COUPLE HERE WHO HAD
CUSTODY OF THE CHILD FOR ABOUT
27 MONTHS.
YOU HAD THE LAWYER FOR THE
GUARDIAN ADD LITEM FOR THE CHILD
AND THEN ON THE OTHER SIDE YOU
HAD A LAWYER FOR THE BIOLOGICAL
FATHER OF THE CHILD AND A LAWYER
FOR THE UNITED STATES ARGUING.
>> Suarez: SO WHY WAS THE
INDIAN WELFARE ACT -- CHILD
WELFARE ACT PASSED IN THE FIRST
PLACE AND DOES THE BIOLOGICAL
FATHER CLEARLY FALL UNDER ITS
PROVISIONS?
>> THE ACT WAS PASSED IN
RESPONSE TO A REAL CRISIS.
IT'S ESTIMATED THAT ROUGHLY 35%
OF INDIAN CHILDREN WERE BEING
REMOVED FROM INDIAN FAMILIES BY
ABUSIVE CHILD WELFARE AGENCIES
AND BEING PLACED IN -- EITHER IN
ADOPTIVE HOMES OR IN FOSTER CARE
AND GENERALLY NON-INDIAN FOSTER
CARE OR ADOPTIVE HOMES.
SO CONGRESS RESPONDED TO THAT
WITH THIS ACT WHICH DOES PROVIDE
SPECIAL PROTECTIONS FOR INDIAN
FAMILIES AS WELL AS FOR INDIAN
TRIBES.
>> Suarez: WAS THERE ANY
ARGUMENT OVER WHAT MAKES SOMEONE
AN INDIAN?
>> THERE REALLY WASN'T SPECIFIC
ARGUMENT ABOUT THAT BUT THERE
WERE QUESTIONS RAISED, SOME
SKEPTICISM ABOUT HOW MUCH OF AN
INDIAN THIS CHILD IS.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS, JUSTICE
ALITO RAISED QUESTIONS ABOUT
WELL, THIS CHILD IS THREE AND
256thS OF CHEROKEE BLOOD.
WHAT IF YOU HAD A TRIBE, FOR
EXAMPLE, THAT DECIDED THAT IT
WOULD ALLOW ANYONE TO ENROLL WHO
DID NOT HAVE ANY CHEROKEE BLOOD
AND SOMEONE DID ENROLL LIKE
THAT, HAD A CHILD.
WOULD THAT CHILD THEN BE
CONSIDERED AN INDIAN CHILD?
THEY POSED SEVERAL HYPOTHETICALS
TRYING TO GET AT HOW FAR THE ACT
REALLY REACHES.
BUT AS THE LAWYER FOR THE
BIOLOGICAL FATHER EXPLAINED,
THERE ARE FEDERAL REQUIREMENTS
FOR RECOGNITION OF TRIBES AND
THOSE HYPOTHETICALS ARE RATHER
EXTREME.
BUT ALSO -- >> Suarez: BUT
THIS IS IN ISSUE IN THIS CASE
BECAUSE -- THE FATHER'S STATUS
AS AN INDIAN WHICH HE'S ARGUING
TRUMPS OTHER KINDS OF CLAIMS AND
OTHER FINDINGS IN STATE COURTS
WHICH NORMALLY HANDLE CUSTODY
BATTLES.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
AND THERE ARE NO BLOOD TESTS
UNDER THIS ACT.
HE -- BECAUSE HE IS THE
BIOLOGICAL FATHER, HE DOES FALL
UNDER THE DEFINITION OF AN
INDIAN PARENT.
BUT THE PARTIES DO DISPUTE HOW
THE ACT APPLIES IN THE SITUATION
WHERE THEY CLAIM-- AT LEAST THE
ADOPTIVE COUPLE CLAIMS-- THAT
THE BIOLOGICAL FATHER HERE, HE
WAS AN UNWED FATHER, THERE'S AN
EXCLUSION UNDER THE ACT FOR
PARENTS, UNWED FATHERS WHO DO
NOT ASSERT OR ESTABLISH
PATERNITY.
THE DISPUTE IS THAT THE
BIOLOGICAL FATHER SAYS THAT HE
DID DO THAT AS SOON AS HE WAS
MADE AWARE OF THE ADOPTION
PROCEEDINGS.
THE ADOPTIVE COUPLES' ATTORNEY
CLAIMS TOO LITTLE; TOO LATE.
>> Suarez: THE NON-INDIAN
COUPLE, THE CUPEL FROM SOUTH
CAROLINA WHO ADOPTED THE LITTLE
GIRL.
IT APPEARED FROM THE TRANSCRIPT
AS IF SOME OF THE JUSTICES
WEREN'T ALL TOGETHER COMFORTABLE
WITH HAVING TO MAKE A CALL IN
THIS CASE.
>> I THINK THERE REALLY WAS SOME
DISCOMFORT.
JUSTICE KENNEDY AT ONE POINT
POINTED OUT THAT FEDERAL --
SORRY, STATE COURTS, FAMILY
COURTS DEAL WITH THESE KINDS OF
PROBLEMS ALL THE TIME AND HE
SAID THE FIRST FAMILY JUDGE
REALLY WAS KING SOLOMAN AND IF
THEY COULD APPOINT KING SOLOMAN
AS A SPECIAL MASTER HERE THEY
WOULD BUT THEY CAN'T.
SO IT CLEARLY IS POSING SOME
DIFFICULT ISSUES FOR THEM.
THERE SEEM TO BE ALMOST A DIVIDE
ON THE COURT BETWEEN JUSTICES
WHO FELT THAT THE LANGUAGE OF
THE LAW IS QUITE CLEAR, THAT THE
FATHER IS A PARENT UNDER THE LAW
AND THAT SPECIAL PROTECTIONS
KICK IN BECAUSE HE IS AN INDIAN
PARENT AND THIS IS AN INDIAN
CHILD AND OTHER JUSTICES
CONCERNED ABOUT WHETHER THE BEST
INTERESTS OF THE CHILD WERE --
ARE REALLY CONSIDERED IN THIS
SITUATION.
DOES STATE LAW APPLY AT ALL IN
MAKING THE DECISION AS TO WHO
SHOULD HAVE CUSTODY?
SO, YES, I'D SAY THAT THEY'RE
UNCOMFORTABLE WITH THIS.
>> Suarez: THERE WERE SEPARATE
ARGUMENTS FROM THE LAWYERS FOR
THE ADOPTIVE COUPLE.
>> RIGHT.
>> Suarez: FOR THE BIOLOGICAL
FATHER DUSTIN BROWN AND FOR THE
GUARDIAN APPOINTED BY THE SOUTH
CAROLINA STATE GOVERNMENT.
WHAT WERE THE CENTRAL CONFLICTS
FROM THESE THREE SEPARATE VIEWS
OF THE LAW?
>> WELL, ON THE ADOPTIVE
PARENTS' SIDE-- AND THEY ARE
SUPPORTED BY THE GUARDIAN AD
LITEM IN THIS CASE-- THEY ARGUE
THAT EVEN IF THE FATHER -- EVEN
IF THE FATHER IS A PARENT UNDER
THE LAW HE HAS NO LEGAL RIGHTS.
HE HAD NO RELATIONSHIP WITH THIS
CHILD.
THAT THE INDIAN CHILD WELFARE
ACT PRESUMES AN EXISTING INDIAN
FAMILY.
IT'S ALL GEARED TO PRESERVING AN
INDIAN FAMILY AND THERE WAS NO
FAMILY HERE.
ON THE OTHER SIDE, THE FATHER
AND THE UNITED STATES ARGUE THAT
THE FATHER DOES FIT THE
DEFINITION OF PARENT AND THE
SOUTH CAROLINA SUPREME COURT AS
WELL AS THE STATE FAMILY COURT
APPLIED THE FEDERAL LAW
ACCURATELY IN REFUSING TO
TERMINATE HIS PARENTAL RIGHTS.
THEY FOUND THAT HE WOULD PROVIDE
A LOVING HOME AND FAMILY FOR THE
CHILD AND MET THE OTHER
REQUIREMENTS OF THE LAW.
>> Suarez: THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION AND MANY INDIAN
TRIBES CAME IN ON THE SIDE OF
THE BIOLOGICAL FATHER.
WE'LL FIND OUT HOW IT ALL TURNS
OUT LATER IN THE TERM.
MARCIA COYLE, THANKS A LOT.
>> MY PLEASURE, RAY.
>> Brown: "IT IS INDISPUTABLE
THAT THE UNITED STATES ENGAGED
IN THE PRACTICE OF TORTURE"
AFTER 9/11.
THAT WAS THE STARKEST FINDING IN
A REPORT RELEASED TODAY BY THE
CONSTITUTION PROJECT, A
BIPARTISAN LEGAL RESEARCH AND
ADVOCACY GROUP, AFTER A TWO-YEAR
INVESTIGATION BY A TASK FORCE OF
FORMER HIGH-RANKING GOVERNMENT,
MILITARY, AND LAW ENFORCEMENT
OFFICIALS.
AMONG MUCH ELSE, THE REPORT
CONCLUDES THAT THE "NATION'S
HIGHEST OFFICIALS BEAR SOME
RESPONSIBILITY FOR ALLOWING AND
CONTRIBUTING TO THE SPREAD OF
TORTURE," AND THAT INFORMATION
GLEANED VIA HARSH INTERROGATION
YIELDED LITTLE VALUABLE
INTELLIGENCE.
THE REPORT ALSO CRITICIZES THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION FOR WHAT IT
CALLS "EXCESSIVE SECRECY."
TWO MEMBERS OF THE TASK FORCE
THAT PRODUCED THE REPORT JOIN US
NOW.
JAMES JONES, A FORMER DEMOCRATIC
CONGRESSMAN AND AMBASSADOR TO
MEXICO, CO-CHAIRED THE GROUP
ALONG WITH REPUBLICAN ASA
HUTCHINSON.
ALSO WITH US IS DAVID IRVINE, A
RETIRED ARMY BRIGADIER GENERAL
AND FORMER REPUBLICAN STATE
LEGISLATOR.
AND WELCOME TO BOTH OF YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Brown: JIM JONES,
INDISPUTABLE THAT THE UNITED
STATES PRACTICED TORTURE.
AT THE TIME THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT SAID OTHERWISE, THAT
WITHIN VERY STRICT RULES THIS
WAS NOT TORTURE.
WHAT MADE YOU SAY THIS WAS?
>> WELL, AN EXHAUSTIVE STUDY OF
THE LAWS OF COURT CASES, OF THE
PRACTICE, OF INTERVIEWS AND THE
SUMMARY OF ALL OF IT WAS IT WAS
INDISPUTABLE THERE WAS TORTURE
IN MANY CASES.
>> Brown: JUST TO BE CLEAR:
YOU DIDN'T HAVE SUBPOENA POWER
HERE AND SO HOW WERE YOU DOING
IT?
YOU SAID BY TALKING TO PEOPLE?
>> WELL, THE STAFF AND SOME OF
THE PANEL MEMBERS VISITED
SEVERAL COUNTRIES, VISITED THE
BLACK SITES WHERE SOME OF THESE
WERE IN POLAND, LITHUANIA, ET
CETERA, THEY TALKED TO
OFFICIALS, THEY TALKED TO
DETAINEES THEMSELVES, AND THEY
DID AN EXHAUSTIVE RESEARCH OF
THE LAW AND THE UNITED STATES
HAS EVEN BROUGHT PROSECUTIONS
FOR THE VERY SAME THINGS THAT WE
DID IN SOME OF THOSE SITES.
>> Brown: DAVID IRVINE, FORMER
U.S. AMBASSADOR JOHN BOLTON TOLD
THE KWRA +*EUP THAT "THIS REPORT
IS COMPLETELY DIVORCED FROM
REALITY."
THE PROCEDURES WERE IN HIS WORDS
"LAWYERED AND LAWYERED AGAIN AND
LAWYERED AGAIN."
>> I THINK IF ANYONE TAKES TIME
TO READ THE REPORT THEY WILL BE
OVERWHELMED BY THE VOLUME OF
EPISODES WHERE REPRESENTATIVES
OF OUR GOVERNMENT, OUR MILITARY
BRUTALLY, BRUTALLY TORTURED
MANY, MANY PEOPLE.
NOT JUST PEOPLE WHO WERE AMONG
THE WORST OF THE WORST AS THEY
HAD BEEN CHARACTERIZED BUT OFTEN
PEOPLE WHO WERE GUILTY OF
NOTHING MORE THAN BEING IN THE
WRONG PLACE AT THE WRONG TIME.
THE CLAIM THAT THIS WAS LAWYERED
TO DEATH IS AN INTERESTING CLAIM
BECAUSE WE HAVE HAD YEARS AND
YEARS AND DECADES OF EXPERIENCE
SUCCESSFULLY INTERROGATING
PRISONERS IN TACTICAL AND
STRATEGIC INTERROGATIONS.
WE HAVE NEVER HAD TO RELY ON
THIS KIND OF APPROACH TO GET THE
INFORMATION THAT WE NEEDED TO
GET TO PROTECT THE COUNTRY.
>> Brown: SPEAKING OF THE
INFORMATION --
>> I JUST WANT TO SAY THE
LAWYERING PART IS ONE OF THE
CRITICISMS WE HAVE.
IN PAST WARS THEY SAY THAT THE
GENERALS RAN THE WAR.
THE LAWYERS RAN THIS WAR TO A
GREAT EXTENT AND THE WAY BY
SUSPENDED THE GENEVA
CONVENTIONS-- WHICH WE HAVE
ADHERED TO FOR YEARS, BY
VIOLATING THE CONVENTION AGAINST
TORTURE WHICH PRESIDENT REAGAN
HIMSELF PROPOSED AND THE
CONGRESS PASSED AND THE LAWYERS
TINKERING WITH THAT IN SUCH A
WAY THAT THEY DID NOT REPLACE IT
WITH ANYTHING AND SO THE CHAIN
OF COMMAND, THE PROCEDURES THAT
WOULD HAVE BEEN IN PLACE WERE
BASICALLY OBLITERATED BECAUSE OF
LAWYERING.
>> Brown: A MUCH-DEBATED ISSUE
HAS BEEN ONE WHAT KIND OF
INFORMATION CAME FROM THESE
PRACTICES.
YOU SAY IN THE REPORT THAT SOME
FORMER SENIOR OFFICIALS INSIST
THAT THE TECHNIQUES DID YIELD
VALUABLE INFORMATION.
YOU CONCLUDE OTHERWISE.
>> WE STUDIED AS CAREFULLY AS WE
COULD FROM THE PUBLIC RECORD
THOSE SPECIFIC CLAIMS.
THE PROBLEM WE HAD AS WE LOOKED
AT THOSE WAS THAT THE TIMELINES
DON'T MATCH UP.
WE COULD NOT ACCOUNT FOR THE
DIFFERENCES-- SOMETIMES A MATTER
OF DAYS, WEEKS, EVEN MANY
MONTHS-- BETWEEN THE CRITICAL
EVENTS OF ARREST, INTERROGATION,
CLAIMS OF SUCCESSFUL GATHERING
OF INFORMATION AND BREAKUP OF
PLOTS.
THERE'S NO SYNCHRONICITY TO THAT
THAT JUSTIFIES THE CLAIM THAT
THOUSANDS OF LIVES WERE SAVED AS
A CONSEQUENCE OF BRUTAL
INTERROGATION.
>> LET ME JUST ADD TO THAT,
BECAUSE WE -- THE -- SOME OF THE
TOP OFFICIALS THAT SAY THIS
TORTURE PRODUCED EFFECTIVE
INFORMATION, THEY HAVE THE
BURDEN OF PROOF.
THEY CAN'T -- WE CAN'T JUST TAKE
THEIR WORD FOR IT.
WE TRIED TO INTERVIEW SEVERAL OF
THOSE AND THEY REFUSED TO BE
INTERVIEWED.
SO ONE OF THE REASONS WE'RE
CALLING FOR DECLASSIFYING SOME
OF THIS MATERIAL IS THAT WILL
SAY YES OR NO, IT WAS EFFECTIVE
OR YES OR NO THERE WASN'T
TORTURE.
>> Brown: AND YOU ARE CRITICAL
OF THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION IN
THAT REGARD FOR NOT
DECLASSIFYING.
>> RIGHT AND WE HOPE THEY WILL.
WE HOPE THEY'LL CHANGE THEIR
MIND.
>> Brown: WERE YOU ABLE TO
TALK TO ANY TOP OFFICIALS IN
AMONG THE MANY PEOPLE YOU TALKED
TO TO FIND OUT WHAT HAPPENED?
AND AFTER THE FACT, AFTER YOU
PRODUCED THE REPORT, ANY TOP
BUSH-ERA OFFICIALS ABOUT THIS?
>> OF COURSE, WE JUST RELEASED
IT TODAY AND I HAVEN'T TALKED TO
ANY OF THE FORMER BUSH
ADMINISTRATION PA PEOPLE.
OBVIOUSLY ASA HUTCHINSON WAS IN
THE BUSH ADMINISTRATION SO THIS
WAS A TOUGH THING FOR HIM TO GO
THROUGH.
BUT WE CAME TO THE UNANIMOUS
OPINION AS REFLECTED IN THAT
REPORT.
WE DID TALK TO SOME.
DAVID RIZZO WAS THE GENERAL
COUNSEL OF THE C.I.A., HE GAVE
AN INTERVIEW.
AND WE HAD SOME OTHERS IN THE
MILITARY THAT WE TALKED TO.
>> Brown: BUT WHEN YOU SAY IN
THE REPORT THAT THE NATION'S
HIGHEST OFFICIALS BEAR SOME
RESPONSIBILITY FOR ALLOWING AND
CONTRIBUTING TO THE SPREAD OF
TORTURE, WHAT DOES THAT MEAN?
WHAT EXACTLY ARE YOU CALLING
FOR?
>> WELL, IN A COUPLE OF
INSTANCES, NUMBER ONE, THE
DECISION TO SUSPEND THE
APPLICATION OF THE GENEVA
CONVENTIONS IN AFGHANISTAN WAS A
CRITICAL DECISION THAT OPENED
THE DOOR FOR ALL KINDS OF ABUSES
BECAUSE THERE WAS NOTHING PUT IN
PLACE THEREAFTER THAT WOULD TELL
SOLDIERS, FOR EXAMPLE, WHAT THEY
COULD OR COULD NOT DO.
AS A CONSEQUENCE, PEOPLE BECAME
UNUSUALLY CREATIVE AND CROSSED
THE LINE FROM LAWFUL TO
UNLAWFUL.
THE DECISION TO GIVE SPECIAL
PERMISSION TO THE C.I.A. TO USE
ENHANCED INTERROGATION
TECHNIQUES WAS A FLAWED
DECISION.
IT WAS BASED UPON A METHODOLOGY
THAT HAD BEEN DEVELOPED BY THE
NORTH KOREANS AND CHINESE IN THE
KOREAN WAR AS A MEANS OF
OBTAINING CONFESSIONS AND FALSE
INFORMATION FROM AMERICAN
PRISONERS IN THOSE CONFLICTS.
>> Brown: LET ME JUST ASK YOU
BRIEFLY IN THE SHORT AMOUNT OF
TIME HERE.
WHAT DO YOU WANT TO HAPPEN NOW?
YOU'VE WADED INTO SOME VERY
CONTROVERSIAL TERRITORY HERE AND
MANY OFFICIALS WOULD SIMPLY FLAT
OUT DISAGREE WITH YOUR RESULTS.
>> WELL, WE'RE NOT AFTER A
WITCH-HUNT BUT WE DO THINK THE
FACTS NEED TO BE LAID OUT THERE,
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE NEED TO
UNDERSTAND IT, THE CONGRESS
NEEDS TO UNDERSTAND IT.
BECAUSE WHAT WE WANT TO DO IS TO
GET BACK TO THE VALUES THAT WE
HAD BEFORE THOSE DECISIONS WERE
MADE.
RESPECT FOR LAW, RESPECT FOR
INTERNATIONAL TREATIES AND
CONVENTIONS AND IT CAN BE
ACHIEVED AGAIN BUT I THINK
BEFORE THAT CAN BE DONE THEY
HAVE TO UNDERSTAND THE DEPTH OF
THE ACTIVITIES WE TOOK IN THE
NAME OF OUR GOVERNMENT.
>> Brown: JAMES JONES, DAVID
IRVINE, THANK YOU BOTH VERY
UC.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE OTHER MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
THE INVESTIGATION OF THE BOSTON
MARATHON BOMBINGS RAMPED UP.
AN EIGHT-YEAR-OLD BOY WAS AMONG
THE THREE DEAD, WITH MORE THAN
170 INJURED.
INVESTIGATORS INDICATED THERE
ARE NO SUSPECTS AND NO MOTIVE IN
THE BOMBINGS.
BUT THE HEAD OF HOMELAND
SECURITY SAID THERE'S NO
INDICATION OF A WIDER PLOT.
SENATE MAJORITY LEADER HAIRY
REID CONFIRMED A LETTER TESTING
POSITIVE FOR RICIN WAS SENT TOE
ROGER WICKER OF MISSISSIPPI.
THERE WAS NO INDICATION THAT
ANYONE WAS HARMED.
>> Brown: OUR COVERAGE OF THE
BOSTON BOMBINGS NTINCOUES ON OUR
WEB SITE, HARI HAS THE DETAILS.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME OF THE MOST
GRIPPING PHOTOS TAKEN ON THE
SCENE YESTERDAY WERE CAPTURED BY
A PHOTOGRAPHER FROM METROWEST
DAILY NEWS, A SUBURBAN BOSTON
PAPER.
FIND THOSE AND PHOTOS OF
TRIBUTES ACROSS THE NATION ON
OUR HOME PAGE.
ALSO THERE, A FIRSTHAND ACCOUNT
FROM A VOLUNTEER DOCTOR WHO WAS
STATIONED FIVE FEET FROM THE
FINISH LINE.
HE WAS ONE OF THE FIRST
RESPONDERS TO TREAT THE WOUNDED.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
JEFF?
>> Brown: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON WEDNESDAY, THE INVESTIGATION
CONTINUES INTO WHO WAS BEHIND
THE BOSTON BOMBINGS.
I'M JEFFREY BROWN.>> Ifill: AND.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE, AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
THANK YOU, AND GOOD NIGHT.